Beautiful technique, [music] man.
Beautiful technique. So, what do you
normally do? Like, what's your process?
Do you just go one plate, two plate?
What are the jumps? So, usually
cuz my adductors get super tight Yeah.
from sitting down and Yeah. work hip
flexors, all that. I usually
do some banded stuff.
>> Yeah. Can you show me? Cuz I sit down a
lot as well.
And whenever I start warming up, uh it's
just a slow process. I spend I spend
half an hour on things like leg presses
with unloaded.
But I do a bunch I do a bunch of stuff.
So, Yeah. I'll usually have this band
anchored. Yeah.
Same
height usually as where you have it
anchored below my knee.
And then I go into my sumo stance. Yeah.
And then I just do some
squatting pattern.
So, I'll just squat and I'll allow the
band Yeah. to How good's that? take my
knees out.
>> And just I'll do this and you can see my
legs like shaking. Ah. Right? You can
see them shaking.
>> What muscles you using to do that? Well,
I'm I'm allowing the band I feel it all
in here. Adductors?
>> Yeah. Yeah, right.
>> So, I allow the band to take me out and
I'm also trying to mimic that same
position Yeah. when I'm gripping the bar
and I'm going down
to that position. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So,
I'm feeling this
and it just helps me dynamically
increase this range of motion without
doing a static adductor stretch. Yeah,
right.
>> Yeah, we talk about the fibers and
Totally. all that stuff. So, I'm
actively or dynamically, whatever you
want to say,
creating this pattern. Well, it's not
passive. Exactly.
>> Yeah. Um So, the difference between
passive stretching and this is active
stretching. Well, that's what I consider
to be mobility. It's strength in the end
ranges, not just
the The to achieve the end range.
>> Exactly. And I'll do it the opposite
way. So then I'll turn around Yeah. and
I'll do the same thing. The band pulling
me
inwards.
>> Yeah. You have to resist against that.
>> And then I'm Where do you feel that when
it's the opposite way?
>> That's like glutes.
>> Can you show me that as well?
No harm in doing an extra an extra set
of warm-ups. Well, that's that's for me
anyway. I spend I spend about half hour.
So check that out. So what do you feel
there? So then now obviously opposite,
but I'm still trying to mimic that same
movement. Right? So I'm still trying to
drive my
my knees out along the bar if I was to
imagine there's a bar here. I'm still
trying to drive my knees out. You can
see Ah, same shaking. You know, this
>> I see your quads on as well.
>> Yeah, everything here is like starts to
burn. So is it a different So that's
front ways was adductors? Yep. And this
way? All through
>> Posterior. Yep, all through like glutes.
Ah. A little bit through
glutes, hamstrings.
>> I mean, I'm not saying his ass looks
nice. I mean, that that too.
But I'm not saying I'm staring at him
from behind saying that looks nice. It
feels But I mean, that exercise, look at
that for a mobility for a warm-up. Is
that specific for sumo or would you do
that for for conventional as well? I'll
do it I'll usually do it for both. I
even do it for my squats. Yeah. I
usually do it for anything lower body. I
know everyone talks about engagement and
activation and this and that whatever. I
just do things that make me feel good.
Hell hell yeah. You know what I mean?
You know, I'll tell you something about
this guy, right? So So this is this is
Critter. Now, Critter, he's been off
powerlifting for a while. When he was
into powerlifting, he's one of the best
in Australia. He was the first
Australian to get a 10 times body weight
total.
This guy, believe it or not. So it's
like I look at him and I look at people
like Anatoly
and it's like he reminds me of Anatoly,
but except Anatoly's a weaker version.
What's your best deadlift? Uh Uh, in
comp it's 300. At what bodyweight was
that? That would have been 75.
>> So, four times bodyweight deadlift in
comp. And And what was your squat at
that weight? It was 30 So, your squat
was more. That's cuz it's wrapped. It's
a funny one because a lot of people say,
"My squat's better than my Why is your
squat better than your deadlift?" For
me, in comp, it was the same, but that's
wrapped. In saying that, I truly think
my deadlift was stronger. Yeah. I never
got the opportunity Ah.
>> it in And I was I was not one to,
you know, go and PB in the gym and try
and
>> I've seen you deadlift 310 before. I've
done 310 in the gym. So, on on the
platform it's around there.
>> I missed 322
>> Yeah. here. Yeah. Literally
>> when you were pulling for the win.
>> pulling for the win. And that was a jump
from 300
>> Yeah. to 322. Yeah.
So, when was the last time you
deadlifted? With you?
Months ago. Yeah. Oh, man.
All right. Anyway, so, Chris is coming
out.
Um, he's working in our business. He's
one of our coaches on our team. He helps
me with all of the content creation,
education, coaching, all that stuff.
Because he's the man.
And every now and then, when he comes
here, it's like,
"Let's just train. Let's just train."
Like, he's got a lot of stuff happening.
So, it's been a while since he's
deadlifted. And um, I've just asked him
to just show me the process of working
up to something decent today. So, I
don't know where he'll get to.
Um,
he just weighed in before at 65 and 1/2
kg. Embarrassing.
>> [laughter]
>> See what I mean about Anatoly? I don't
know what Anatoly What is Anatoly
weight? We're going to find these stats.
And what's his best deadlift? Because I
know it's not as much as him. I know
there's some AI-generated videos of him
doing a clean with 300 kg. Impossible.
That's not That's AI.
Um, but I think his deadlift best
deadlift I don't think he's hit the 300.
>> he's about 70 kilos. He weighs 70?
>> I think I
Yeah, I think Yeah.
Um, yeah, and he's lean, but so is Kroc.
We're You know what I want to do? I want
to show this guy in his top form.
Anyway, you should check out cuz I love
to give tutorials, especially on
conventional deadlift, because I'm a
conventional deadlifter, and I've
coached some pretty outstanding
conventional deadlifters. But, this guy
is actually both. Um but anyway, because
um that's the void that I have here is
my sumo expertise. I'd tell you now, I'm
very good at sumo, but just not as good
as this guy. So, what we're going to do
is check out his process with his
warming up. So, a bunch of all of that
stuff, I think you guys can take that
home immediately for everything, as he
said, lower body. But, let's have a look
at the technique.
Sumo deadlift 140.
>> [snorts]
[sighs]
[snorts]
>> So efficient.
>> [snorts]
>> You know what I was thinking? I did a
10-step uh deadlift tutorial on
Instagram that I posted the other day,
and I never realized this, but someone
commented on there saying,
"Notice how nine of the 10 steps are all
before lifting the weight off the
floor." So, so all of the setup
is more important than the actual lift.
And I'm just watching this guy just take
however long that just took to do every
little process, and then he just goes,
and then the lift is over. It's like
baking a cake. All the ingredients are
important before the heat.
The heat is like that that little I've
never baked a cake. I'll eat a cake
though.
>> [laughter]
>> So
like you can say baking a cake and then
eating it is the same analogy. Yep.
Yeah, it'll take me 2 seconds to eat
your cake.
But um mate, I like that. I like that.
What's the next set? We keep going up in
plates.
>> plate plates. I'll go 180 next. All
right.
>> And then So before all this, I'll do
that. I'll do
RDLs.
Uh yeah, okay. Actively again, actively,
dynamically. Stretch hamstrings,
posterior chain, do some lower back
stuff, but apart from that,
do some body weighted squats, chuck a
plate on. Yeah. And then just
Okay. And then high reps at the start,
low reps at the end. So what I like to
do whenever I train with the camera, I
like to say this, I don't want to talk.
Because it's uh distracting when we want
to go I want to see him actually work
today. So I'm going to start talking to
Critter again after he reaches the top
set, and then we'll get inside his head
with some training processes because,
you know,
doing the technique is one thing, and
and that's I think the majority of your
success in the long term is lifting
technique, is refining the technique. So
we spend majority of our sessions I'm
going to do bench press by the way. We
spend majority of our sessions preparing
ourselves for really, really nice top
set of the main movement of the day. And
then it's kind of a breeze at the end of
the session. It's just like easy stuff
now. So same with the focus. It's like
if your priority is on lifting
technique, this is of course with a
strength goal. So many differences as a
hypertrophy athlete or a bodybuilder to
a strength athlete. With strength, skill
of lifting is the is like the highest
priority you can focus on for your
long-term success. If all you did was
let's just say did your program, and you
just had to do squats, bench, deadlift,
choose your favorite lifts, and just did
that exercise, you'll go forward. You
come in, you master the movement, you
refine the technique. And then you do a
couple of great working sets. Like,
that's the majority of your work.
But, I've been doing seminars for a long
time. And it's like, yeah, what's the
best return on investment that I can
give you if I was to do a one-day
seminar? It's technique, technique,
technique, technique. So, I did all of
my seminars based on technique. And then
people are like, "Okay, cool. Now I
understand the technique.
How much of it am I going to do? How
many reps of it? How many sets of it?
How often do I do it per week? And what
are some accessory exercises that I can
include with that?" So, it's like,
"Okay, true. The programming does
matter."
>> Mhm. Yeah.
>> But, the high So, the highest priority
is let's refine the hell out of the
technique. So, that's what we're going
to do first. And then after you get cuz
I want you to stay in your the right
mindset for this. Um
I'm going to pick your brain. We're
going to talk about programming
strategies for the deadlift. And I'm
going to just give you a quick um
disclaimer. His strategy for his
deadlifts is quite different to how most
people would typically think. Firstly,
when you're in comp prep, how often you
do heavy sumo deadlifts? Um honestly,
towards when I was my strongest, it
would be once a fortnight. Sometimes I
would do it once a month. Like,
>> Like, heavy or or just sumo? Heavy.
Like, it's just if if we're talking the
last 8 weeks of prep,
>> Yeah. Yeah. it would be more frequent
further out
>> Yeah. because I wouldn't be so beat up
and all that stuff. And then as I got
closer, I would just probably pick two
very heavy sessions in the last 4 weeks.
Wow. Yeah.
>> And I would time them so that it
wouldn't affect my squat.
>> Yeah. So, would you still sumo every
week? I would still sumo, Right.
>> but it would be like a technical base
session.
>> frequent with the heavy session.
>> In- frequent with heavy, but frequent
with the movement.
>> I I love that. That's To be honest with
you, I was going to say it's so
different. It's not that different to to
my strategy with heavy lifting. With my
leg lifters, it's kind of heavy session,
light session, heavy session, light
session. It's just good to see whenever
I speak to other people that his
training uh wasn't influenced by me.
He's uh yeah, he's his own guy. This was
years ago when we're competing against
each other and he was beating me on on
formula. That's another story. But,
yeah, it's good to see that like at the
top levels like when you compare the
strategies it's like, "Oh, yeah,
that's how we do it as well." Yeah. Oh,
interesting.
>> and honestly, that's
>> [clears throat]
>> when
How long have we known each other for?
2013, but since I've been
working with you and we've been learning
together and you know, doing everything,
I look back at all that stuff when we
were in our prime and we just
not naturally, we still learned about
it, but what we intuitively knew and did
was
80-90% correct. Yeah. You know, even to
the sessions where I would come in How
long would it take you to do a squat
session? 2 hours, 3 hours. Yeah, and
most of it was just the first set. It's
the first set. And then you By the time
you get to accessories, you're like,
"Oh, fuck." Yeah. You know, but when you
look at how we program or your program
strategies with your heavy lifters, it's
like, "What do we give them after
squats?
Leg extension, hamstring curls, see you
later." Easy stuff.
>> You know, so it all makes sense. Yeah.
All right, let's do this. 180. You keep
on going and then and then we'll come
back when we get to something heavy.
Um, we'll see
if I'm going to go and do some research
now while you're doing that. I'm going
to see what Anatoly can do.
>> [sighs and snorts]
[snorts]
[sighs]
>> Nice.
Yeah, typically what I what I would do
is
let's say this is my top set. Yeah. This
is my last warm up. This is my second
last warm up. The jump between my second
and last to my last warm up
is bigger than the jump between my last
warm up. Yeah.
Well, then you can go 30 20.
Mhm. So, 240 220 260.
Unless
you go 20 20 10. Just take your time.
Yeah, that's the other thing I was
thinking of. Yeah, so we go 230.
See what that looks like. Mhm. And then
if it looks okay, we'll go 250. Yeah.
And if that looks like it's good, then
we squeeze an extra 10 out of you.
Or 235.
Let's go 230. Let's go to Let's put Put
a green on each side. Make it ugly as
[__]
Can we put the green here in the middle?
Yeah. [__]
>> [laughter]
>> Unreal.
Blasphemy. Yeah. Anyway. No, but if we
get to a good number, that's when we'll
clean it up. I'll load the plates for
you then.
Yes, sweet.
>> I'll make it I'll make it look lovely.
>> [laughter]
>> I remember once upon a time I did
I don't remember what the weight it was,
but it was
green red green red green red
for Christmas. Yeah, I've done that. So,
were you here when you did that?
>> No, I didn't. I think I did the same
thing. Okay, right. But it was What was
that? Was it 260 or Could have been. But
um
Oh, [__] Yeah, sometimes when I look at
like weightlifters do it a lot. They
just get just an assortment of different
plates.
This guy goes to me He One time I I
don't know what I did. He goes, "Oh, you
can You can squat the rainbow."
I go, "The what?"
He goes, "You squat the rainbow." I go,
"What's that?" It's like every color. I
go, "What do you How much is that?"
I don't know what it was. I think
there's two different types of rainbows.
There's 160, which is
uh red, blue, yellow, green. That's 160.
And then add the five.
It's 170. And then the two and a half,
and then the silver clip, that's 180.
Yeah. So, it's like you squat the
rainbow. So,
>> [laughter]
>> uh
The rainbow's [__] ugly.
180 is four blues, son.
I think an extra 10 and 8 sides, that'll
come up.
Yeah. How you feeling, bro?
Yeah.
Working?
Just feels different. Pretty That's what
happens when you haven't touched it for
a long time.
>> It just feels different. It doesn't feel
I can't say I feel bad.
>> Yeah.
>> Just For me, I think when it comes to
deadlifts, you need to feel the weight
in your hands if you're going to go
heavy. Like, for me, I've been doing
like volume work and all that stuff. But
then when you go heavy, it's like, "Oh,
that just feels different." As you're
saying. You know, so to come back after
the first time off, to go straight to
heavy is a strange sensation. It is very
strange. You know, I've worked with
people where I've built their strength,
we've done volume phases, do all that
stuff. And you build their strength,
it's like they've got a certain number
in their head. And they go for it, and
they go to lift it, it's like, "Oh." And
they just let go. It's like, "That was
too heavy." And it's like,
"That was flying. You just let go."
Like, and I have to record them and show
them the video of themselves. I should
have shown you that video because that
looked pretty good. Well, and that's I
asked Musty before to show me the one
before. Yeah. Because it's like I need
to see what it looks like. And this is
the beauty of recording your your sets,
right? Because how you feel is a lie.
Very much so. And even worse when you're
Yeah. peaking. Yeah. So, it's like your
mood's like, "Oh, that was really hard."
And then you have a look at it and it's
like,
"Huh, wasn't that hard." You know,
that's what I like to do. It's like,
don't don't worry about what you feel
like. I go, "If I was to coach that guy,
how much more does that guy have in
him?"
The way that I saw that was like, yeah,
if I put 10 on each side, it'll come up
for sure. Yeah. So, that was 230. I
reckon if you have 250 on there,
I I think that's coming up. And the
biggest thing too is like
it's [__] patience. Yeah. You know,
like how many times do you what you
said, you see people, they start to
initiate the lift, you're like, "Yeah,
you [__] got it." And then
they let go because they they have that
shock of like, "Fuck, this is heavy."
It's like, "Well, no." And especially
with sumo,
sumo's probably the one one of the most
patience patient lifts. I've heard that.
>> I've I've heard that and used that.
Patience off the floor
>> Mhm. in particular.
>> Mhm. So, that's when I see good sumo
lifters like it either comes off the
ground,
right? And if it comes off the ground,
it just goes boom. It's like, "Whoa,
there was so much more in there." And
they're like, "Oh, that was limit." It's
like, "What?" Mhm. And then they go a
little bit heavier and they can't get
off the ground. Mhm.
Cuz that's where the biggest fight is.
Yep. And most people give up before
that. So, you see the bar starting to
bend and you're like, "They're moving
this." Yeah. And then the weight starts
to literally each weight off the floor
and then they just not it's because if
you just just give that one more second.
You keep going. Patience off the floor.
>> But also, I'll tell you something that I
don't know. Maybe you'd know, maybe you
don't because I think you're very
technical. The way that I see it, cuz I
work with a lot of non-technical people
as well. And and I'm one of those. You
know, it's like, what would you normally
do in a conventional? Is you just just
push harder, right? And then you can
break technique a little bit in a
conventional. Your back might bend and
all those things and the weight will
come off the ground and you can brute
force that thing.
But you try and do the the thing with a
sumo and it's not as forgiving. It's a
lot more precision involved, and so it's
like a lot of the best sumo deadlifters
understand those things. And what I
understand as a coach when I'm working
with beginners and intermediates that
are learning sumo,
that's where they
mess up. They go back to the
conventional mentality, and they just
go, "Just keep ripping." The knees come
in, the back rounds, and then I get off
the ground, but then they can't lock it
out. I was just looking at this before.
This is
a perfect example that
you're doing the right things with sumo.
Yeah, your shins are gray.
>> literally gray, and then in the shower
tonight I'll be screaming. Yeah. Like
it's a it's a thing that I say to people
that they ask me, like should my shins
be bleeding? I'm like, [__] oath they
should. Yeah. Yeah. But also wear socks.
Yeah. You know. Well, I find that like
and I've used it as videos. Um the world
record I lifted in sumo,
official, Stan Griggsby in powerlifting
competition,
and you just see blood just going out of
his shins. So, I well, that's what
happens. Every world record attempt,
it's on the shins. How do you know the
bar's close? Yeah, [snorts] that you
can't get closer.
Yeah. Um but yeah, I think that's what I
mean by like when I was saying, I don't
know if you'd know this, like your
technique is just it doesn't compromise.
Mhm. And I'd say that's from years of
just perfect perfecting that movement.
There's no compromise. So, that's
something that I notice with with Critz
and his mechanics, and you'll probably
see it on the next ones. Like when you
see his side view, his posture is is no
deviation. There's no deviation from
completely rigid torso.
But also something that he is able to
achieve when he gets in his bottom
position, how close your hips get to the
bar. Mhm. From a technique perspective
is when people do go to a sumo, Yeah.
like you said, they treat it like
conventional. So, they
they're they do the same movement
patterns with their hips and their knees
and blah blah blah
as conventional. And what you do with a
conventional is you don't try and bring
your hips Yeah. this way.
>> Yeah. All right. So, when they're doing
a consumer, they're coming down and
they're coming down like a Oh, yeah.
conventional
>> Training like the conventional.
>> this odd position
where you're more angled over, you know,
there's a little bit of a
misunderstanding with that rotation this
way. Yeah. You know? So, you can sit
down into position where you say
>> I was just looking him in the eyes when
he went like this to me. I was like
>> a few more times as well. Yeah. That
felt funny.
That felt funny.
>> Put your legs to the bar.
That's the key for a pull on top of the
bar.
>> bar. You know what? [music] I don't want
to sidetrack you. I think that 250 I'm
going to load this for you.
Yes! Oh, yeah!
Easy! Easy!
Easy!
Bro!
>> [music]
>> Bro!
Hey!
If it were me and I saw what happened, I
would be very tempted to add an extra 10
kg on there and I betcha it would come
up. Let's have a look, bro.
Textbook. Okay.
See all the work that goes involved in
everything. That's the hard part. And
then it just goes donk. Yeah.
Let's have a look.
And you have Bro!
>> [laughter]
>> Bro!
How do you feel, man?
>> [sighs]
>> I had to go somewhere special for that.
Can you do that again?
I can give it a go.
I need some time, but I can give it a
go. Take all the time in the world, bro.
That was beautiful. And I think six
plates is there today, bro. I want to
see you go to that place, man.
>> [snorts]
>> I love that.
I love that place, too. Yeah, but it's
hard It's very often. You can't go there
very often.
Why don't you do this? I'm going to load
the plates. You sit down and chill,
okay? And just give yourself a couple of
minutes. If you want, you can have a
look at this again, all right?
And and you make the decisions you need.
I could see the fight was off the floor.
And if I was to be a dick and say how
would I correct that? I would say your
right leg came forward just a touch.
>> Yeah, I completely agree.
>> and if you if you kept your hips open
harder and kept it glued to your body a
little bit better, that would have been
even easier. And you know, funny you say
that cuz I felt this since I started the
session. Ah. I've got this little
>> On the right side. There's a little
Yeah, so it kind of just went here.
>> Just niggle like that.
>> Damn.
What's it feeling like after that?
>> It's nervy. Has it changed? No, it's
stayed the same. If anything, it's it's
gotten better. I just did some other
stuff in between the sets and whatever,
but yeah.
It's um
I know what it is. Yeah, and it's
something that my whole powerlifting
career it's just been
been there. But that's you know, we talk
about
this [__] all the time and it's so
common and prevalent whatever, but when
this stuff happens or I haven't trained
for a bit or whatever and it gets
aggravated, it just sits there and I can
just feel it, but that's what I think
that is.
It's an innovation thing. Yeah. You just
see the right leg just move forward. I
think it's just an innovation thing
where that nerve is not Yeah.
And I could be overthinking it, but
I think um
I've felt this for a long time and known
Ah, like once it was moving it just went
just folded into place. It just went
donk.
And I knew if I could just hold
that position as much as I could and
just like we said, be patient with it.
As soon as I feel
those you can see the plates just one at
a time. As soon as I feel that, I know
if I hold on to the bar
>> Yeah. it's it'll it'll go up.
So How do you feel now?
Yeah.
You know what it's like when you have
high adrenaline and [__] and you
>> Mhm.
So
>> But yeah, it's
it's not Yeah. nothing crazy. I just
I I knew that's what it was.
I knew it.
You You tell me. You want to go 260
>> We'll go
and I'll Okay, cool. You too. Put your
earphones on and let me load it up. I'm
going to do some sets in between.
>> [sighs]
>> You know what, Cridland?
Your old knee is going to keep coming
forward. Mhm. If you go for this, your
knee is going to come forward and I I
think that it's not even worth it, bro.
I hate it when I speak to an athlete and
it's just like, "Yeah, do you want to
go?" It's like, "Yeah, this here's an
eagle. You know, but yeah, I'll go."
It's like
We got two approaches. Go for it, risk
[__] something happening
>> Mhm.
or we just go, "Let's just take our wins
and just run." Mhm.
You know what, Cridland?
Let's just leave it. Let's just leave
it.
Let's just do back down work. Okay. Can
you do that? Yeah.
Probably smarter.
I It's like we're not training for
anything. We'll come back next time and
we'll hit that.
It'd be different I feel like if I had
12 months.
I've trained under my
>> You know what I mean? You've had no
months.
>> [laughter]
>> You trained 12 months ago.
No, not really. How many months ago was
it you came here?
>> I don't know.
It was It I think two You know what?
Let's Let's leave it. I'm not going to
put another plate on. Let's
do the opposite. I'm going to take plate
off.
And let's do What I want to do instead
is a little bit of technique work. When
I say technique work, I want you to
teach my audience your technique. As
much as I'm good at queuing a a
deadlift, that deadlift is perfection. I
want you to tell us what you're doing.
Give us a go.
The The main thing that I think about
and I'll compare this to conventional
too when I do it because it is
you know, there are similarities but
there also are some differences.
When I walk up to the bar for a sumo,
I always position my legs
so that they're touching.
And we know how different that is to
conventional setup, right? Yeah. So, my
cue is to have
the bar when my knees are extended to
have the bar uh sorry, to have my shins
touching the bar.
>> Yeah.
Because to myself then,
I say, "Well, when I go down to grab it,
I'm not going down like a conventional
where I'm flexing my knees and shins are
going forward.
>> I'm trying to maintain that position
where my shins are as vertical as
possible.
>> So, the barbell's like the gauge of
don't come beyond this point.
>> Correct. Yeah.
>> And it's the same conventional except
you start
in a slightly different position.
>> You give yourself room to push your
knees forward.
>> It is. Right.
>> Yeah, yeah. But I start so that I am
touching. And most people, you know, you
tell them, "Oh, it's Make sure your
shins are touching the bar." But they'll
go into position and then they'll do
this.
>> Ah. But then when I stand up, They're
away. Look where the bar is.
>> Watch out.
Yeah.
>> You know what I mean?
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah. So,
I position so that I'm touching with my
knees fully extended like I'm in a lock
up position without the bar in my hands.
Yeah, love it.
Then from there, I sort of just
flex my knees and drive them along the
bar.
>> Mhm.
Right? So, I'm trying to see if they're
they're even. Mhm. Okay? And if that's
my position of where I like to have
my
my shins in a in a deadlift. Mhm. Right?
Cuz I can go here and go, "Yeah, I think
they look good." I personally aim for
something that's
perpendicular. So, that's your knee.
That's what I like to talk about, the
knee directly over the foot. So, your
your tibias are completely perpendicular
to the ground. And this is different for
some people. Mhm. Like, if I could do
this
Yeah.
and deadlift I would. Yeah. But, I
probably can't. No, it's just not
stronger for you. No. So, that's that's
your strong point is where your I think
that's a really nice start point as
well. And that's what I
try and teach people to start. It's
like, "Well, what's a good start point?"
Let's try and get it so your knee's
exactly
vertical or perpendicular to your foot.
So, that's your that's your position.
>> personal one. And then what? You look at
people like Ed Coan. Yeah. Right? He's
close. Very close. Well, closer. Yeah.
Very close to me. Yeah. And I've tried
it. I've tried it. Like, there are
videos of me deadlifting in in that
position, but So. Just not for not for
me. Yeah. So, but he's got long arms,
really good levers for it. Probably gets
more drive from his legs. Now, let's go
foot angle. Mhm. Do you think of that?
Yes. So, only recently, like before I
came for that last session, I was
videoing my my deadlifts and
I noticed that I was
really turned in for what I usually do.
And I was watching the video and then I
was getting into position,
my knee was going out here. So, if I was
to draw a line
from here, my knee was going out here
and then my foot Uh. was going at a
slightly different angle. I like to try
and keep them as aligned as possible.
>> I like that. So, I try and keep my foot
or my toes Same direction as your femur.
>> Same direction as that as my finger.
Yeah. That's just my
>> Finger is the upper thigh bone. That's
just my personal Then from there,
obviously the grip same as conventional,
we try and have arm straight down. Yeah.
Not by our side, obviously, cuz that
would So, can I just intervene here?
When I look at all that, you say your
shins on the bar. When your feet are
splayed out that much, it gives you a
lot less base of support. So, when your
feet are straight ahead, you've got a a
longer base of support. But, then when
we turn them outwards, the base of
support shrinks. So, by default, having
them on your shins is the center of your
base of support. It's perfect alignment.
>> Yeah.
Okay. Same rules apply. Funny you say
that cuz the next thing I was going to
say is
the more
you have it angled outwards, the less
balance you have. Yeah. So, you see
people at home they do that.
>> I did that. When I first started, I was
here and I'd pick up like when I was
warming up on my deadlift, I'd falling
over. Yeah. So, it's like a really fine
line.
>> So, you got to learn that stability. You
got to learn that balance. Correct.
Yeah.
And then, yeah, like I said, grip, I go
straight down. Unfortunately,
every bar's knurling doesn't go narrow
enough. Yeah. All right.
>> So, I'm half on the knurling, half on
the smooth.
>> the optimal grip width is shoulder
width, where your arms are perpendicular
to the ground. So, that means for you,
you'd be able to do that with half your
hand on the smooth part. So, that's
completely vertical. So, is that where
you hold it? That's right. Right. So,
regardless of the knurling, cuz I've
seen a lot of like there's some women
that I work with that are really good
deadlifters and they go
they grab it on the knurling and it's
like, "Can you go closer?" It's like, "I
don't have grip there." But,
too bad. Right. Okay. So, that's it. You
just cop it and it's just a little bit
less grip here. Yeah. Which is a
disadvantage.
>> Can you feel that it's less grip there?
Not in the moment.
>> used to it. Before, I'm like, "Fuck, I
wish the knurling was a bit narrower."
Yeah.
I'm like, "I wonder. Like, what if what
if what if?" But, whatever. Okay,
interesting. So, arms straight down. The
same rule applies. So, if you're doing a
sumo deadlift out there, arms straight
down. Conventional, it's arms straight
down. But, a lot of the times people's
stance gets in the way of being able to
achieve that position. But, sumo,
nothing's in the way except for if you
perceive that the need for knurling
is a what you'd prioritize over a more
efficient grip position. Yeah. The The
efficient grip position is where your
arms are straight down. If you go
outside of that, you have to travel
further. The analogy that I give is a
snatch grip deadlift is an accessory
that we give to make you travel further.
So, that's what people are doing kind of
voluntarily is just going wider because
they think it's a better grip. It might
be, but you're losing out on that
efficiency. Okay, cool. So, we've got
our shins on the bar,
knees over foot,
toes pointed in line with the femurs,
arms completely perpendicular to the
ground, and shins perpendicular to the
ground.
Good.
And then from this position, my goal is
to keep the bar stationary as possible.
>> Yeah. The bar does not move. Don't let
your shins push that bar forward. That's
the best cue for a sumo is when you try
and teach someone drive your knees out
along the bar, that's what it should be.
It shouldn't be knees forward and try
and drive up like a conventional. So,
then yeah, from this position, it's
essentially just my own, you know,
personal setup or whatever I like to do
psychologically. And then
it's very similar to a conventional. So,
I take the slack out of the bar. Yeah.
Right, I take the tension out, I get my
breath, and then as I'm getting my
breath or as I've got my brace, I come
down, I drive my knees out, and as soon
as I'm in that position, where the shins
are touching the bar,
then it goes. Yeah. So, you take the
slack out of the bar, you take your
breath and brace from the ground, you'll
jump your hips up. That's where you take
your breath and brace, and that's where
you take the slack out of the bar.
>> Mhm. From there, you're wedging your
hips in. Mhm. And that's what helps me
actually rotate them forward.
Right?
>> you see it from side on, this is what I
love when I see Chris' technique,
is just his proportions and mobility.
Like, he's strong in that position. So,
a lot of people like me, I have the
flexibility to achieve that position,
but I lack the strength there. So, when
you see me side on, my hips are way
further away from the bar, but you've
strengthened that position so well.
Show us again. So, the moment arm is the
distance from the bar path. So, draw an
imaginary line from the bar and the main
acting joint, which is his hips.
So, bring your hips back.
So, just back further further. That's a
longer moment arm. Now, get in position.
Drives his hips closer and closer. He's
minimizing the moment arm. His torso is
so vertical. This is huge of Damn,
that's huge efficiency.
>> you said, this is if you were from
Musashi's position, is like most people
I can't even do it cuz it'll hurt my
back. It's like most peop- Oh, there we
go. Most people would deadlift They
anteriorly rotate their pelvis.
>> right. Yeah. But, for a sumo, we want to
do Tuck your hips. that. Yeah. And it's
very uncomfortable. And we hear it all
the time, "Oh, if someone does a 400
kilo deadlift, oh, but it's sumo." Yeah.
Okay, try and do that.
>> yeah. Try and do it with that load.
>> Yeah. And see what happens. Yeah.
Anyway, that's a different topic.
>> so, the way that I see that is
This is something that I see like I'm
going to talk about some beginners that
I see with their their deadlift. They
arch their tail because they don't want
to get into the the rounded position.
So, they excessively arch backwards. And
something that I know with the anatomy
of the adductors is they attach to the
pelvis in a position where you arch your
tail back, it creates tension on the
adductors and they end up going
like this. So, when So, the cue that I
give is piss up a wall and it allows
them to get to achieve that position of
nice beautiful open hips. Mhm. And when
you look at your spine, it looks like it
feels like when you do that, you're
rounding your spine.
But, when you look at yours from side
on, it's perfect. Mhm.
And that's that's the thing you have to
get used to is that feeling of Most
people And the same with squats, the
same with like any new technique they
do. You tell them to breathe and brace
crunch their ribs down like like cues.
And they're like, "I feel like I'm
rounding my back." And you go, "Well, go
and watch it from the side. See what it
looks like. It definitely does not look
like you're rounding you're arching your
back." So, it's So, what I like to teach
is rigid spine rather than And I might
say the word neutral, but neutral is a
range, right? And you When you think
neutral spine, your lumbar spine has a
natural It's called a lordotic or
lordosis curve, right? So, it's arched
this way. And
that's considered neutral, but neutral
is a range. This is also neutral as
well. But, what's happening here so
nicely with Critter is it's locked in
place. So, wherever he starts, now he's
got his muscles holding his spine in
place, and he's now using that lever
like a crane, and it just wedges those
hips in, and he stands up rather than
passively resting on his spine and
picking up like his spine's a fishing
rod.
I mean, some people do that as well, but
at higher levels, you just don't see
that. You see control, and the lifter
knows how to engage the spine. Now,
something you haven't mentioned now, but
I know that you do it beautifully is how
you engage your lats, which I which I
say is the biggest contributor to
locking that whole structure in. How How
do you do that? You do it so well,
right? You know that your arm levers
aren't the best for conventional
deadlifts, but you do it so well because
you compensate through this movement,
and I love that. Like, I try and do it
even though my levers are good, I still
try and do that. Because I like that
slight thoracic flexion
to increase my range of motion. I'm not
doing this, but I like that slight um
thoracic flexion, and then lats on.
Because that increases your range uh
decreases your range of motion, yeah.
Right? A cue that I give for lats is put
your armpits to your pelvis. What What
What do you think? I pretty much use the
same thing. Armpits to pelvis? It's
pretty much just uh I I reach I'll get
into position cuz it's easier to do it.
>> [sighs and snorts]
>> So, I'm in this position.
I'll bring my hips up.
>> [snorts]
>> And you'll see that I'm rounding through
my thoracic.
>> Yeah. And then as I come down, bring my
shins forward, knees out.
>> [snorts]
>> Armpits to pelvis, crown of the head to
the ceiling, go.
>> So, you're lengthening your spine. Yeah.
But, I'm not I'm not arching my back.
>> Yeah. I'm maintaining that flexion,
>> Yeah. driving, engaging my lats, crown
up, and then just literally trying to
keep the bar as close as possible, and
drive straight up.
>> Nice. Let's go step by step. Walk up to
the bar in your comfortable [snorts]
sumo stance until your shins are
touching, pointing your toes outwards to
your comfortable position.
So, a very nice start point that I like
to say is where the tibia is
perpendicular to the ground.
From here,
bracing by pissing up a wall. So, it's
kind of just a relaxed pelvis position,
would you say?
>> Mhm. Yeah. From here, he's just bending
over to grab the bar with his arms
complete just straight down,
shoulder-width apart, [snorts]
perpendicular.
He uses a mixed grip. Some people use
hook. I notice he does on his warm-ups.
From here, he raises hips in the air.
That's where he inhales and braces
maximally.
That's where he's also taking the slack
out of the bar. So, look at his arms.
They're long and stretched like a rope
from his shoulders to the bar. Stretch.
Now, from here, he wedges his hips close
to the bar
while he's pulling his armpits towards
his pelvis to engage his lats lats and
his crown of his head towards the
ceiling. He almost got me in the balls.
Almost got me in the balls.
>> Sorry, you weren't ready for No, I was
ready. I was like, he's going to go now.
I I was going, is he actually going to
lift or is he going to pretend? Like,
I'll get out of the way anyway.
So,
back to that. There was so much time and
effort and energy and focus spent on the
start position
that we haven't really even discussed
what you think about like with locking
it out and everything like that. So,
let's go there. The people say they call
a deadlift a pull. So, we're doing pull.
It's like, well,
what's the focus when you're in
position? Crown of head to ceiling,
armpits towards the pelvis, you've taken
the slack out of the bar.
For me, it's a spread. Ah.
I love that. Because
you're naturally going to pull. Yeah.
You're naturally going to push Okay.
through the floor.
>> Yeah.
You don't naturally think about
spreading.
>> Yeah.
And that's just more specifically for a
sumo for me. So, the spr- I I
I love that cuz I say, you can't
deadlift without pulling. It's got to
pull. So, therefore, I don't cue pull.
The body knows that. But with
conventional, I say, push. Push the
world away or leg press the floor away.
And that's what I think of thinking of.
You're taking another step further
saying, the body knows to pull, the body
knows to push, but it doesn't it's not
second nature to spread. So, that's
where your focus is. So, so, from
standing here, what do you mean by
spread? So, you're pushing outwards?
Yeah, so, like we've said, those knees
are driving outwards, but I'm also
trying to actively spread my feet
towards the plates. Yeah, yeah. All
right. So, I'm trying to get And your
feet slip?
It well, I I what I was doing before is
then I was doing my warm-ups, I was
like, [__] it's a bit slippery back
here. So, I was trying to put my foot on
the on the black part. But, obviously,
deadlift slippers and the right footwear
and stuff like that, different story.
>> Yeah. So,
I don't think you get enough unless it's
super socks on a wooden platform, all
right, which we don't recommend.
>> Yeah.
Unless it's a super slippery surface, I
don't think you'll get much of that.
>> That's the actual problem.
>> Yeah. Okay, so we go spread.
And then what? So, then and then the bar
starts lifting. Yeah. So, you're going
you're going push outwards. You're
spread outwards. Yeah. And arms. And the
b- Oh, and pull and keep the bar glued
to your body.
So, that's lats, right? So, that's
called shoulder extension. That's an
action of the lats.
And And this is what I say, when the bar
drifts forward, it's a telltale that you
don't know how to use your lats. Like,
you're you're not using lats. How do I
know you're using lats? Touch your body.
And this is where I even teach people.
Some people disagree with this, but I
say as a as a beginner cue, I want to
hear the bug sliding up your shins,
which can hurt. Oh, yeah. So, I'll give
them [__] I'll give knee sleeves on the
shins and I'll say, "I want to hear it
going
up the shins." As
>> Even worse with sumo because your shin
is on the nail. Yeah, so it's ripping
ripping the skin off. Ripping the skin
off, yeah. [snorts] So, um armpits to
pelvis crown of head to ceiling, spread,
and then what? Anything else? Stand.
That's just comes naturally. We just
know how to stand. That's what It's real
easy. Yeah. Something that I see
incorrect is like leaning back and all
that. So, lock flex the quads hard. I
literally try and actively tense my
quads.
>> Yeah, flex the quads as hard as you can.
And don't
>> and lean back to get that low. But you
don't what?
>> Try and lean back. Don't try and lean
back.
So, we're just getting vertical. So,
like do you think you're driving hips
through?
It just naturally goes.
>> I think for me now it's just naturally
comes.
>> Yeah. Um because that's a part of my
process of trying to stand up as tall as
possible. Continuing to reach the crown
straight up. Yeah, I I get you.
>> Yeah. Okay, so you're not trying to go
forward back, it's just vertical.
Completely just vertical vertical. And
it just naturally happens.
>> happens. One more thing we haven't
touched on is sequence. So, I say knees
locked out hips push through in that
order.
Do you think about that?
No, I know I know it happens again. It
just naturally happens again. Cuz some
people try and
be simultaneous with the the knees and
hips, but the bar's in the way. And what
happens is that's when you get kind of
like a funny hitch movement, especially
with conventional. I shouldn't talk
about sumo, but especially with
conventional they go
when it gets heavy.
>> Yeah. So, you've got to go lock the
knees, then drive the hips through.
That's the sequence, boom boom. It looks
more
uh exaggerated with the sumo. You I
personally think that you see more
people very snappy with the sumo like
they go
>> I do see that a lot.
>> Right? I see snap snap.
>> Yeah. And you don't see it with
a conventional as much, but
you You have to be very skilled to be
able to do that and then not lose your
balance with a sumo.
>> Now, while you're here, I'm going to
throw a spanner in the works. Now,
Critter
um does a lot of conventional as well.
So, this is something that a lot of
people ask me is
um does conventional deadlifters need to
do sumo?
Um and I say they don't need to, but
it's not a bad idea. Um but something
that I say is all the sumo deadlifters
that I coach, I make sure they do
conventional. Now, you do conventional.
But something that I've noticed is
whenever I teach a great conventional
deadlifter how to do sumo, they come
back to their conventional deadlift more
technical. Mhm. Right? Because I find
that the sumo deadlift is far more
technical. So, they kind of carry over.
So, now let's have a look at your
process with a conventional deadlift.
Hang on a second. What's What's your
best conventional deadlift? Did you ever
max out with conventional?
Ah, I would say I got close, but I
wasn't at like the end of my career.
>> whenever you're competing at sumo, so
you're only practicing your peak on your
sumo lift.
>> Well, fun fact, like I started
conventional. I did conventional for
I don't even know. Maybe the first 3
years or whatever it was and before I or
2 years before I started.
>> I've I've seen I remember seeing a video
of you doing 220 for 10. Yeah. And the
reason why that resonates with me
because that was always a big goal of
mine. And I would say 220 for 10 equals
300 for one. It did for me. 220 for five
is 260 for one.
And then 220 for 10 was 300 for one. You
know, this is just boy maths. So, you at
home figure it out. You tell me what you
can do. If anyone can do 220 for five,
you probably can do 260 for one. Tell me
if I'm right or wrong. 220 for 10
is what I've seen you do and I go,
"Fuck, that guy's conventional deadlift
would be at 300."
>> 290. Well, I I did it 290 and my goal
was And I I reckon I could have done
300, but Show me Show me your setup for
a conventional so that we can see the
similarities between the the
and the body positioning in between the
two. So,
>> [snorts]
>> starting with stance,
hip width. Mhm. Let's have a look at
He's just walked up to the bar and his
shins aren't touching anymore, but if
you look side on, the barbell's
perfectly in line with his midfoot.
So, that means the shins are probably
for you that That's about an inch and a
half away from the bar.
>> Yep. Cool.
>> [snorts]
>> Bends over and grabs the bar with his
arms straight down.
Arms are long and relaxed, reaching
down.
From here, takes a big breath to brace,
drives his hips up in the air to take
the slack out of the bar. Now, he wedges
his hips into position
and pushes the world away.
As he's wedging his hips in position,
we'll probably see on that angle there
his lats just go boom.
So, that's armpits to pelvis, same cue.
Crown of head to the ceiling, same cue.
>> Same cue. And then I say push the world
away. You're not spreading now. No, I
think about the same thing. You just
push straight down. Treat the world like
it's a leg press, which battery died.
That one. Treat the world like it's a
leg press.
Knees locked out, hips pushed through.
Yeah, I like that.
Kritou, that was a very beautiful
deadlifting tutorial. I hope you guys
enjoyed that. Um we're going to have
Kritou back. We're going to put him on a
you know, I'm going to
try and twist his arm and say, "Come
back and give me a 260 or a 270 or a 280
or something like that next time." 270
wouldn't 272? 272 is how we speak to the
Americans. That equals 600 lb. That
would be nice. Solid ass
pounds.
>> That would be nice. That'd be nice. Uh
let's see if he can do it. I hope you
guys enjoyed all of that. Um Kritou's on
the team. He's one of the head coaches
here at Strength System and we've been
working together for many, many years.
So, I hope you enjoyed that. We'll put
all of his handles uh Instagram and all
that, but you're going to see more of
him. Um and I hope you guys enjoyed. If
you guys have any um questions or
comments or any [__] like that, if you
want to see Kritou come back, just put
in the comments and we'll have him back.
They're going to twist my arm.
I don't have to twist his arm. He's just
coming, on,
Uh
>> [sighs]
>> yeah, if you want to train with Creed or
Sebastian,
hit us up. You know where to find us.
>> We're here.